Veuillez nous excuser pour l'envoi multiple.

Le LIMSI propose trois offres de post-doctorat
en traitement automatique des langues dans le cadre
de deux projets collaboratifs.

1. Gestion de dialogue dans un système de dialogue personne-machine
où le système joue le rôle du patient pendant une consultation
médicale avec un médecin.

2. Acquisition de connaissances sur les correspondances entre
des ontologies/terminologies professionnelles et la terminologie
du grand public.

3. Extraction d'informations à partir de forums de santé pour
aider la pharmacovigilance.

Plus de détails ci-dessous.

Post-doctoral positions at LIMSI-CNRS, Paris Saclay (Paris Sud) University

LIMSI is a multi-disciplinary research unit that addresses the
automatic processing of human language for a range of tasks.

LIMSI invites applications for three one-year Postdoctoral positions
in Natural Language Processing.  The topics involve:

1. Dialogue management in a human-machine dialogue system where the
system plays the role of a patient during a medical consultation with
a doctor.

2. Acquisition of knowledge about the mappings between professional
ontology / terminology and lay people terminology.

3. Information extraction from social media for improve
pharmacovigilance.

CONTEXT

The postdoctoral fellow will contribute to one of the two following
projects:

Patient Genesys (1, 2: http://www.patient-genesys.com/): in the
framework of continuous medical education, the goal of the project is
to design and develop a framework for virtual patient-doctor
consultation.  This is a collaborative project including a hospital
and small and medium enterprises.

Vigi4MED (3): the aim of the project is to discover unknown effects of
drugs by exploring the contents of posts in patient forums.  This is a
collaborative project with academic partners among which two
pharmacovigilance centers.

JOB REQUIREMENTS

- Ph.D. in Computer Science, Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguistics
- Solid programming skills
- Strong publication record
- A good command of French is a plus
- Knowledge of medical terminologies and ontologies is a plus

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Net salary: between 2000 and 2400 € per month according to experience
Benefits: LIMSI offers a generous benefit package including health
   insurance and 44 days vacation pa.
Duration: 12 months, renewable depending on performance and funding
   availability
Start date: 1st October 2014
Location: Orsay, greater Paris area, France

TO APPLY

Please send:
* a cover letter
* a curriculum vitae, including a list of publications
* the names and contact information of at least two referees
to both:
     Cyril Grouin <grouin@limsi.fr>
     Sophie Rosset <rosset@limsi.fr>
     Pierre Zweigenbaum <pz@limsi.fr>

Application deadline:  July 15th, 2014
Applications will be examined in the following week.

ABOUT LIMSI-CNRS

LIMSI is a laboratory of the French National Center for Research (CNRS),
a leading research institution in Europe.

LIMSI is a multi-disciplinary research unit that covers a number of
fields from thermodynamics to cognition, encompassing fluid mechanics,
energetics, acoustic and voice synthesis, spoken language and text
processing, vision, visualisation and perception, virtual and augmented
reality.

LIMSI hosts about 200 researchers, professors, research support staff
and graduate students. It is located in a green area about 30 minutes
south of Paris.

