Chers collègues,

Le laboratoire ERIC accueille Osmar Zaïane le lundi 8 juin à Lyon 
(campus Porte des Alpes). A 11h (salle K71 au rez-de-chaussée du 
laboratoire), il nous fera l'honneur d'un séminaire intitulé "From Big 
Data Analytics in Healthcare to New Generic Data Mining Approaches". 
Vous trouverez un résumé de sa présentation ci-dessous.

Osmar Zaïane est Professeur à l'Université d'Alberta au Canada et 
directeur scientifique du centre d'innovation AICML 
(http://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~zaiane/). Chercheur reconnu 
internationalement dans le domaine de la fouille de données, il 
travaille en particulier sur la recherche d'information, la 
visualisation et l'analyse des réseaux sociaux. Il a publié plus de 200 
papiers dans des actes de conférence et des journaux de grande renommée, 
tels que ICDM, SIGKDD, VLDB, ACM TIST, Knowledge and Information 
Systems. Il est impliqué dans les comités de pilotage de nombreux 
événements majeurs du domaine et est éditeur associé des revues 
Knowledge Information Systems et Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Il 
a reçu le Outstanding Service Award lors de la conférence ICDM 2009 et 
le Service Award de l'Association for Computing Machinery en 2010.

Pour des raisons d'organisation, merci de me signaler votre présence par 
simple retour d'email.

Bien cordialement,

Julien Velcin
Laboratoire ERIC

--------

*From Big Data Analytics in Healthcare to New Generic Data Mining 
Approaches*

More data may lead to more accurate analyses. Combining disparate 
information sources may bring up the value of the data. These are not 
new held opinions. The advent of the so-called Big Data phenomenon which 
has not spared the healthcare domain, has only brought more evidence to 
these notions and reinforced the conviction.

The views about Big Data have been articulated in many ways, but the 
concept boils downs to exponential and rapid growth of data, referred to 
as Volume and Velocity, but more importantly the necessity to integrate 
data from distributed, dissimilar and essentially poles apart data 
sources often belonging to different custodians. This is known as 
Variety. This is obviously not new or foreign to the healthcare domain 
where data has always been of different kinds, amasses at high speed and 
is dispersed. One recognized peculiarity of Big Data is that traditional 
data processing applications are inadequate and new techniques for data 
analysis/data science are required. The impact in the other direction is 
also conceivable.

In this talk, after briefly introducing Big Data and reporting on a real 
research application in medicine, I will outline some innovation in 
conventional data analysis for generic data mining derived directly from 
healthcare data science projects.




