
Intellectica (http://intellectica.org/) est une revue francophone referencee
consacree a la publication de travaux theoriques, epistemologiques et
historiques dans le champ des sciences de la cognition. La revue publie
egalement des textes en langues anglaise. Creee en 1985, la revue fetera donc
ses 30 ans d'existence en 2015. Dans cette perspective, le nouveau comite de
redaction, qui siegera a present a l'ISCC (Institut des Sciences de la
Communication du CNRS), souhaite mettre en place dans les annees a venir des
numeros a base d'articles en soumission libre; ces numeros venant s'ajouter
aux classiques dossiers thematiques que la revue produit (2 volumes/an) et
continuera a produire.

Voici les details de l'appel:
date limite de soumission: 26 mars
date de parution du volume: decembre 2014
Langue: français ou anglais
Format des documents: voir "Instructions aux auteurs" sur le site de la revue
(http://intellectica.org/version-francaise/59-2/)

Les articles qui nous parviendront au dela du 26 mars seront examines pour un
volume ulterieur en 2015.
Intellectica souhaite s'affirmer comme un espace de reference et de debat par
la publication de textes de haute qualite a caractere reflexif en sciences de
la cognition. Nous esperons que la communaute des chercheurs de ce domaine
appreciera le travail realise par la revue et contribuera a son evolution.

Pour toute question concernant cet appel: olivier.gapenne@utc.fr


Olivier Gapenne, Redacteur en chef

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[English version]
Call for Papers

Intellectica (http://intellectica.org/) is a referenced French-language
journal devoted to the publication of theoretical, epistemological and
historical work in the field of Cognitive Science. The journal also publishes
articles in English. Founded in 1985, the journal will celebrate its 30th
anniversary in 2015. On this occasion, the new Editorial Committee, which will
have its seat at the ISCC (Institute of Communication Sciences of CNRS),
wishes in the future to promote volumes of the journal entirely based on
papers that are freely submitted; these volumes will supplement the volumes
based on thematic dossiers that the revue has produced in the past (2 volumes/
year) and will continue to produce.
In this perspective, the journal is now making an open Call for Papers.
Details:
•	Deadline for submission of full manuscript: 26 March 2014.
•	Date of publication: December 2014.
•	Language: French or English
•	Format of texts: see “Manuscript submission” on the website of the
journal (http://intellectica.org/en/manuscript-submission/)

  Articles which are submitted after the 26th March will be considered for
publication in a subsequent volume in 2015.
Intellectica wishes to establish itself as a reference journal and a space for
debate by publishing high-quality articles with a reflexive dimension in the
field of Cognitive Science. We hope that the community of research scientists
in this domain will appreciate the work accomplished by the journal, and that
they will contribute to its evolution.
For all questions concerning this call for papers: olivier.gapenne@utc.fr

Olivier Gapenne, Chief Editor




