Bonjour,

J'ai le plaisir de vous inviter à ma soutenance de thèse de doctorat en
informatique,  réalisée en co-tutelle entre la Faculté des Sciences de 
Tunis et Télécom Sud Paris, intitulée : " Computational Models of Trust 
and Reputation in Online SocialNetworks ". La soutenance aura lieu le
Vendredi 22 Janvier à 14h dans les locaux de Télécom SudParis à Evry.

Vous êtes également conviés au pot qui suivra la soutenance.

Le jury sera composé de :


Rapporteurs :  Pr.Henda BEN GHEZELA          Université de la Manouba 
(Tunisie)
                Pr.Katarzyna WEGRZYN-WOLSKA    ESIGTEL-Paris
Examinateurs :  Pr.Bénédicte LEGRAND        Université Paris 1 - 
Panthéon- Sorbonne
              :  Pr.M.Mohsen GAMMOUDI        Université de la Manouba 
(Tunisie)
                 Pr.Yolaine BOURDA           Supelec-Paris
Co-directeurs :  Pr. Ala GANGARSKI         Télécom Sud Paris
               :    Pr.Sadok BEN YAHIA        Université El Manar
               :  Pr. Amel BOUZEGHOUB         Télécom Sud Paris


*Abstract*:


*
*

The open and decentralized nature of the OSNs makes them vulnerable to 
the appearance of malicious users. Therefore, prospective users face 
many problems related to trust. Thus, effective and efficient trust 
evaluation is very crucial for users’ decision-making. It provides 
valuable information to OSNs users, enabling them to make difference 
between trustworthy and untrustworthy ones. This thesis aims to provide 
effective and efficient trust and reputation management methods to 
evaluate trust and reputation of OSNs users, which can be divided into 
the following four contributions. The first contribution presents 
complex trust-oriented users’ contexts and interests’ extraction, where 
the complex social contextual information is taken into account in 
modeling. Second, we propose the IRIS (Interactions, Relationship types 
and Interest Similarity) trust management approach allowing the 
generation of the trust network and the computation of direct trust.

The third contribution of this thesis is trust inference in OSNs. In 
fact, it is necessary and significant to evaluate the trust between two 
participants whom have not direct interactions. We propose a trust 
inference model called TISON (Trust Inference in Social Networks) to 
evaluate Trust Inference within OSNs. The fourth contribution of this 
thesis consists on the reputation management in OSNs. To manage 
reputation, we proposed two new algorithms. We introduce a new exclusive 
algorithm for clustering users based on reputation, called RepC, based 
on trust network. In addition, we propose a second algorithm, FCR, which 
is a fuzzy extension of RepC. For the proposed approaches, extensive 
experiments have been conducted on real or random datasets. The 
experimental results have demonstrated that our proposed algorithms 
generate better results, in terms of the utility of delivered results 
and efficiency, than do the pioneering approaches of the literature




Bien cordialement,

Sana HAMDI


