

[French version]

Appel à publication

Intellectica (http://intellectica.org/) est une revue francophone référencée consacrée à la publication de travaux théoriques, épistémologiques et historiques dans le champ des sciences de la cognition. La revue publie également des textes en langues anglaise. Créée en 1985, la revue fêtera donc ses 30 ans d'existence en 2015. Dans cette perspective, le nouveau comité de rédaction, qui siégera à présent à l'ISCC (Institut des Sciences de la Communication du CNRS), souhaite mettre en place dans les années à venir des numéros à base d'articles en soumission libre; ces numéros venant s'ajouter aux classiques dossiers thématiques que la revue produit (2 volumes/an) et continuera à produire.

Voici les détails de l'appel:
date limite de soumission: 26 mars
date de parution du volume: décembre 2014
Langue: français ou anglais
Format des documents: voir "Instructions aux auteurs" sur le site de la revue (http://intellectica.org/version-francaise/59-2/)

Les articles qui nous parviendront au delà du 26 mars seront examinés pour un volume ultérieur en 2015.
Intellectica souhaite s'affirmer comme un espace de référence et de débat par la publication de textes de haute qualité à caractère réflexif en sciences de la cognition. Nous espérons que la communauté des chercheurs de ce domaine appréciera le travail réalisé par la revue et contribuera à son évolution.

Pour toute question concernant cet appel: olivier.gapenne@utc.fr


Olivier Gapenne, Rédacteur en chef


[English version]
Call for Papers
Intellectica (http://intellectica.org/) is a referenced French-language journal devoted to the publication of theoretical, epistemological and historical work in the field of Cognitive Science. The journal also publishes articles in English. Founded in 1985, the journal will celebrate its 30th anniversary in 2015. On this occasion, the new Editorial Committee, which will have its seat at the ISCC (Institute of Communication Sciences of CNRS), wishes in the future to promote volumes of the journal entirely based on papers that are freely submitted; these volumes will supplement the volumes based on thematic dossiers that the revue has produced in the past (2 volumes/year) and will continue to produce. 
In this perspective, the journal is now making an open Call for Papers.
Details:
	• Deadline for submission of full manuscript: 26 March 2014.
	• Date of publication: December 2014.
	• Language: French or English
	• Format of texts: see “Manuscript submission” on the website of the journal (http://intellectica.org/en/manuscript-submission/)

 Articles which are submitted after the 26th March will be considered for publication in a subsequent volume in 2015.
Intellectica wishes to establish itself as a reference journal and a space for debate by publishing high-quality articles with a reflexive dimension in the field of Cognitive Science. We hope that the community of research scientists in this domain will appreciate the work accomplished by the journal, and that they will contribute to its evolution.
For all questions concerning this call for papers: olivier.gapenne@utc.fr

--
Olivier Gapenne, Chief Editor

Professor in Cognitive Science/Psychology
Université de Technologie de Compiègne
Director of the UTC Doctoral School
BMBI - UMR 7338 CNRS - Labex MS2T
Tel office: (33)+344235290
Network: Linkedin
AEM-Cube: Innovator




